The Role of Vitamin D in Suppressing Cytokine Storm in COVID-19 Patients
and Associated Mortality

**Keywords:** Vitamin D, cytokine storm, CRP, COVID-19

**Key findings:** Using clinical data of patients and statistical
analysis, the authors wanted to explore the potential role of vitamin D
in decreased cytokine levels which may lead to the reduction of disease
severity in COVID-19 cases. The study shows that Spain and Italy present
a severe vitamin D deficiency. Concerning COVID-19, the two countries
have a higher mortality rate and a higher case fatality rate (CFR) for
patients age ≥ 70. The authors have also shown that subjects with a
severe deficiency of Vitamin D have 1.4 times higher risk for production
of high C reactive protein (CRP), used to indirectly evaluate cytokine
storm. They hypothesized that Vitamin D deficiency increases the risk
for cytokine storm in COVID-19 patients and they estimated a 15%
reduction in the number of severe COVID-19 cases after vitamin D
deficiency elimination.

**Potential limitations:** The results of this study remain
hypothetical. Future studies should assess vitamin D and
pro-inflammatory cytokine levels in COVID-19 patients upon hospital
admission and the role of vitamin D in decreasing cytokine levels should
be evaluated. In addition, the authors did not take into account the
medical history of COVID-19 patients in their analysis, as previous
studies have shown that patients who have comorbidities (cardiovascular
disease, hypertension, chronic pulmonary disease, hepatic disease,
diabetes and other chronic disease) are more likely to develop a severe
COVID-19 *https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.11.20030957v1*

[*https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.30.20043919v1*](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.30.20043919v1)

Furthermore, age has been reported to be a major factor that determines
outcome for COVID-19 and it has been demonstrated that aging affects the
formation of the active form of vitamin
D.[*https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4399494/pdf/nihms662547.pdf*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4399494/pdf/nihms662547.pdf)
[*https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3782116/pdf/nihms466447.pdf*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3782116/pdf/nihms466447.pdf)
It would be interesting to see if vitamin D deficiency in the elderly
associates with severe forms of COVID-19. Finally, the authors have
chosen to use CRP to evaluate the intensity of cytokine storm which is
an indirect approach. However, even if CRP has been regarded as a
pro-inflammatory molecule, it has some anti-inflammatory functions
(recruitment of complement inhibitors and release of anti-inflammatory
cytokines such as IL-10 and IL-1ra) and could be replaced by more
specific inflammatory markers.
[*https://www.fasebj.org/doi/pdf/10.1096/fj.11-186460*](https://www.fasebj.org/doi/pdf/10.1096/fj.11-186460)
[*https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0889159118300266*](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0889159118300266)

**Overall relevance for the field:** The study results did not
demonstrate a direct and obvious link between vitamin D deficiency and
severe cases of COVID-19 that feature cytokine storm. The study is based
only on analysis of the reported clinical data from multiple studies,
the results are therefore hypothetical and require a more direct
demonstration to see if vitamin D supplementation could really suppress
cytokine storm in COVID-19 patients.

Review by Meriem Belabed as part of a project by students, postdocs and
faculty at the Immunology Institute of the Icahn school of medicine,
Mount Sinai.
