**Presence of SARS-CoV-2 reactive T cells in COVID-19 patients and
healthy donors**

Braun J et al.; medRxiv  2020.04.17.20061440;
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.17.20061440

***Keywords***

-   SARS-CoV-2 specific CD4 T cells

-   Human endemic coronaviruses

-   COVID-19

***Main findings ***

In this preprint, Braun et al. report quantification of virus-specific
CD4 T cells in 18 patients with mild, severe and critical COVID-19,
including 10 patients admitted to ICU. Performing *in vitro* stimulation
of PBMCs with two sets of overlapping SARS-CoV-2 peptide pools – the S I
pool spanning the N-terminal region (aa 1-643) of the S protein,
including 21 predicted SARS-CoV-1 MHC-II epitopes, and the C-terminal S
II pool (aa 633-1273) containing 13 predicted SARS-CoV-1 MHC-II epitopes
– the authors detected S-protein-specific CD4 T cells in up to 83% of
COVID-19 patients based on intracellular 4-1BB (CD137) and CD40L (CD154)
induction. Notably, peptide pool S II shares higher homology with human
endemic coronaviruses (hCoVs) 229E, NL63, OC43, and HKU1 that may cause
the common cold, but it does not include the SARS-CoV-2 receptor-binding
domain (RBD), which has been identified as a critical target of
neutralizing antibodies in both SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2. S I-reactive
CD4 T cells were found in 12 out of 18 (67%) patients, whereas CD4 T
cells against S II were detected in 15 patients (83%). Intriguingly,
S-specific CD4 T cells could also be found in 34% (n=23) of 68
SARS-CoV-2 seronegative donors, referred to as reactive healthy donors
(RHD), with a preference for S II over S I epitopes. Only 6 of 23 RHDs
also had detectable frequencies of S I-specific CD4 T cells, overall
suggesting S II-reactive CD4 T cells had likely developed in response to
prior infections with hCoVs. Of 18 out of 68 total healthy donors
tested, all were found to have anti-hCoV antibodies, although this was
independent of concomitant anti-S II CD4 T cell frequencies detected.
This finding mirrors observations of declining numbers of specific CD4 T
cells, but persistent humoral memory after certain vaccinations such as
against yellow fever. The authors further speculate that these
pre-existing virus-specific T cells against hCoVs might be one of the
reasons why children and younger patients, usually considered to have a
higher incidence of hCoV infections per year, are seemingly better
protected against SARS-CoV-2. Unlike specific CD4 T cells found in RHDs,
most S-specific CD4 T cells in COVID-19 patients displayed a phenotype
of recent *in vivo* activation with co-expression of HLA-DR and CD38, as
well as variable expression of Ki-67. In addition, a substantial
fraction of peripherally found HLA-DR^+^/CD38 bulk CD4 T cells was found
to be refractory to peptide stimulation, potentially indicating cellular
exhaustion.

***Limitations ***

This is one of the first preprints reporting the detection of
virus-specific CD4 T cells in COVID-19 (also cf. Dong et al.,
[*https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.17.20036640v1*](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.17.20036640v1);
Weiskopf et al.,
[*https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.11.20062349v1.article-info*](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.11.20062349v1.article-info)).
While it generally adds to our current knowledge about the potential
role of T cells in response to SARS-CoV-2, a few limitations, some of
which are discussed by the authors themselves, should be addressed.
Findings in this study pertain to a relatively small cohort of patients
of variable clinical disease. To corroborate the observations made here,
larger studies including greater numbers of both healthy donors and
patients of all clinical stages are needed to better assess the function
of virus-specific CD4 T cells in COVID-19. Specifically, the presence of
pre-existing, potentially hCoV-cross-reactive CD4 T cells in healthy
donors needs to be explored in the context of COVID-19
immunopathogenesis. While the authors suggest a potentially protective
role based on higher incidence of hCoV infection in children and younger
patients, and therefore a presumably larger pool of pre-existing
virus-specific memory T cells, the opposite could also be the case given
cumulatively increased number of hCoV infections in older patients. In
this context, it would therefore have been interesting to also measure
anti-hCoV antibodies in COVID-19 patients. Furthermore, this study did
not quantify virus-specific CD8 T cells. Based on observations in
SARS-CoV-1, virus-specific memory CD8 T cells are more likely to persist
long-term and confer protection than CD4 T cells, which were detected
only at lower frequencies six years post recovery from SARS-CoV-1 (*cf*.
[]{#_ENREF_18 .anchor}Li CK et al., Journal of immunology *181*,
5490-5500.) Morover, no other specifities such as against the N or M
epitopes were evaluated. Robust generation of virus-specific T cells
against the N protein was shown to be induced by SARS-CoV-2 in another
pre-print by Dong et al. (Dong et al.,
[*https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.17.20036640v1*](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.17.20036640v1)),
while Weiskopf et al. recently reported preference of both CD8 and CD4 T
cells for S epitopes
[*https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.11.20062349v1.article-info*](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.11.20062349v1.article-info)).
Moreover, the authors seem to suggest that some of the virus-specific
CD4 T cells detected could be potentially cross-reactive to predicted
SARS-CoV-1 epitopes present in the peptide pools used. Indeed, this has
been recently established for several SARS-CoV-2 binding antibodies,
while it was found not to be the case for RBD-targeting neutralizing
antibodies (*cf.* Wu et al.,
[*https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.30.20047365v2*](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.30.20047365v2).;
Ju et al.,
[*https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.21.990770v2*](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.21.990770v2)).
A similar observation has not been made for T cells so far and should be
evaluated. Finally, since reactive healthy donors were only tested for
anti-S1 IgG, however not for other more ubiquitous binding antibodies,
e.g. against M, and only a fraction of these donors was additionally
confirmed to be negative by PCR, though unlikely, there is the
possibility that some of the seronegative reactive donors were
previously exposed to SARS-CoV-2.

***Significance***

Quantification of virus-specific T cells in peripheral blood is a useful
tool to determine the cellular immune response to SARS-CoV-2 both in
acute disease and even more so post recovery. Ideally, once immunogenic
T cell epitopes are better characterized, tetramer assays will allow for
faster and more efficient detection of their frequencies. Moreover,
assessing the potential role of pre-existing virus-specific CD4 T cells
in healthy donors in the context of COVID-19 pathogenesis will be of
particular importance. The observations made here are also highly
relevant for the design and development of potential vaccines and should
therefore be further explored in ongoing research on potential
coronavirus therapies and prevention strategies.

*This review was undertaken by Verena van der Heide as part of a project
by students, postdocs and faculty at the Immunology Institute of the
Icahn school of medicine, Mount Sinai.* 

 
