**SUCCESSFUL MANUFACTURING OF CLINICAL-GRADE SARS-COV-2 SPECIFIC T CELLS
FOR ADOPTIVE CELL THERAPY**

Leung Wing et al.; medRxiv  2020.04.24.20077487;
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24. 20077487

***Keywords***

-   SARS-CoV-2 specific T cells

-   Adoptive T cell transfer

-   COVID-19

***Main findings ***

In this preprint, Leung et al. report the isolation of
SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells from two convalescent COVID-19 donors (n=1
mild, n=1 severe; both Chinese Singapore residents), using Miltenyi
Biotec’s fully automated CliniMACS Cytokine Capture System: convalescent
donor PBMCs were stimulated with MHC class I and class II peptide pools,
covering immunodominant sequences of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein as well as
the complete N and M proteins; next, PBMCs were labeled with a
bi-specific antibody against human CD45, a common leukocyte marker
expressed on white blood cells, as well as against human IFN-γ,
capturing T cell-secreted IFN-γ in response to stimulation with
SARS-CoV-2 peptides. Post stimulation, IFN-γ^+^ CD45^+^ cells were
identified by a mouse anti-human IFN-γ antibody, coupled to
ferromagnetic dextrane microbeads, and magnetically labeled cells were
subsequently isolated by positive immunomagnetic cell separation.
Enriched IFN-γ^+^ CD45^+^ cells were mostly T cells (58%-71%;
CD4&gt;CD8), followed by smaller fractions of B (25-38%) and NK cells
(4%). Up to 74% of T cells were found to be IFN-γ^+^, and 17-22% of T
cells expressed the cytotoxic effector marker CD56. Very limited
phenotyping based on CD62L and CD45RO expression identified the majority
of enriched CD4 and CD8 T subsets as effector memory T cells. TCR
spectratyping of enriched T cells further revealed an oligoclonal TCR ß
distribution (vs. a polyclonal distribution pre-enrichment), with
increased representation of Vß3, Vß16 and Vß17. Based on limited
assumptions about HLA phenotype frequencies as well as estimated
haplotype sharing among Chinese Singaporeans, the authors suggest that
these enriched virus-specific T cells could be used for adoptive cell
therapy in severe COVID-19 patients.

***Limitations ***

This preprint reports the technical adaptation of a previously described
approach to isolate virus-specific T cells for targeted therapy in
patients with CMV and EBV (reviewed by Houghtelin A et al.:
[*https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5641550/pdf/fimmu-08-01272.pdf*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5641550/pdf/fimmu-08-01272.pdf))
to PBMCs obtained from two convalescent COVID-19 patients. However, not
only is the title of this preprint misleading - no adoptive cell
transfer was performed -, but this study also lacks relevant information
- among others - on technical details such as the respective S epitopes
studied, on the precise identification of immune cell subsets (e.g. NK
cells: CD56^+^ CD3^-^?), data pertaining to technical stimulation
controls (positive/negative controls used for assay validation and
potentially gating strategies), as well as on the percentage of live
enriched IFN-γ^+^ CD45^+^ cells. Generally, a more stringent
phenotypical and functional characterization (including coexpression
data of CD56 and IFN-γ as well as activation, effector, proliferation
and other markers) would be advisable. Similarly, in its current
context, the TCR spectratyping performed here remains of limited
relevance. Most importantly, though, as noted by the authors themselves,
this study is substantially impaired based on the inclusion of only two
convalescent donors from a relatively homogenous genetic population as
well as lack of any potential recipient data. In related terms, clinical
criteria, implications and potential perils of partially HLA-matched
cell transfers are generally not adequately addressed by this study and
even less so in the novel COVID-19 context.

***Significance***

Adoptive cell therapy with virus-specific T cells from partially
HLA-matched third-party donors into immunocompromised recipients has
been successfully performed in the past (cf.
[*https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5641550/pdf/fimmu-08-01272.pdf*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5641550/pdf/fimmu-08-01272.pdf);
[*https://www.jci.org/articles/view/121127*](https://www.jci.org/articles/view/121127)).
However, whether this approach might be clinically feasible for COVID-19
therapy remains unknown. Therefore, larger, more extensive studies
including heterogeneous patient populations are needed to assess and
balance potential risks vs. outcome in the new context of COVID-19.

*This review was undertaken by V. van der Heide as part of a project by
students, postdocs and faculty at the Immunology Institute of the Icahn
school of medicine, Mount Sinai.* 

 
