**The RBD of the spike protein of SARS-group coronaviruses is a highly
specific target of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies but not other pathogenic human
and animal coronavirus antibodies**

Premkumar L et al., medRxiv 2020.05.06.20093377; doi:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.2009337

***Keywords***

-   SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding domain (RBD) binding antibodies

-   Endemic human coronaviruses

-   Cross-reactive abs/ELISA 

***Main findings***

 

There is an urgent need for both sensitive and specific SARS-CoV-2
serological testing to not only reliably identify all infected
individuals regardless of clinical symptoms, but to determine the
percentage of convalescent individuals on population level.

In this preprint, Premkumar et al. study the performance of the
SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding domain (RBD), which has been found to be
largely unique across individual coronaviruses, as a target to
specifically detect antibodies against SARS-CoV-2. By generation of
recombinant RBDs of SARS-CoV-1, SARS-CoV-2 and human endemic
coronaviruses (hCoV HKU-1, OC-43, NL63 and 229E), antigen
cross-reactivity of these targets was evaluated by ELISA, using sera
obtained from both infected and convalescent COVID-19 patients, healthy
control individuals as well as pooled sera collected from various
animals immunized with either SARS-CoV-1, SARS-CoV-2 or animal
coronaviruses. While sera from mice and rabbits previously exposed to
SARS-CoV-1 spike protein were found to be cross-reactive, recognizing
both the SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 RBDs (yet none of the hCoVs), serum
from SARS-CoV-2-immune mice predominantly reacted with SARS-CoV-2.
Importantly, control sera obtained from healthy donors without a prior
history of either SARS-CoV-1 or SARS-CoV-2 were found to only detect
hCoV-RBDs. Additionally, assessment of highly concentrated sera
collected from 20 healthy donors in the US prior to emergence of the
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic confirmed high levels of antibodies against hCoVs in
the majority of subjects, whereas cross-reactive antibodies against the
SARS-CoV1 and SARS-CoV-2 RBD could not be detected. Furthermore,
serological testing of sera obtained from convalescent Dengue and Zika
virus patients (n=40) as well as from recently recovered patients with
influenza A (n=2) and respiratory syncytial virus (n=1) demonstrated
frequent antibodies against hCoV RBDs, but a lack of cross-reactive
antibodies against both the SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 RBD as opposed to
positive controls of pooled sera from SARS-CoV-1 immunized guinea pigs.
Notably, sera from recently recovered, PCR-confirmed hCoV patients
(NL-63, OC-43, HKU-1; n=2 each) were equally not cross-reactive against
either the SARS-CoV-1 or SARS-CoV-2 RBDs (again using guinea pigs
immunized with SARS-CoV-1, SARS-CoV-2 or various animal coronaviruses as
positive and negative controls), suggesting that the SARS-CoV-2 RBD is a
highly specific target for serological SARS-CoV-2 testing. Furthermore,
assessment of total Ig as well as IgM binding to recombinant SARS-CoV
and hCoV RBDs in 77 samples obtained from 70 PCR-confirmed COVID-19
patients of variable clinical disease revealed high sensitivity (Ig:
98%, IgM: 81%) for specimens collected at least 9 days post symptom
onset. Of note, 67% (Ig) and 30% (IgM) of these samples were also found
to be cross-reactive against the SARS-CoV-1 RBD. Repeated sampling of 14
of these 77 patients suggested that seroconversion had occurred between
day 7 and day 9 post symptom onset. In addition, 19/77 patients were
tested for development and kinetics of neutralizing antibodies (nAbs).
Notably, 14% of these 19 patients had detectable levels of nAbs by day
7, whereas 95% of them were positive for nAbs by day 9. One patient
failed to elicit both anti-RBD binding and nAbs. Finally, a robust
correlation between levels of RBD binding Ig and IgM as well as nAbs was
detected, suggesting that levels of RBD binding Abs in COVID-19 patients
might be used as a correlate for the development of potentially
protective nAbs.           

 

***Limitations***

 

While this is generally a well-conducted study, interrogating a
relatively large number of COVID-19 patient and healthy control samples
as well as sera from immunized animals, one limitation pertains to the
patient cohort enrolled. Given that clinical disease might directly
relate to Ab titers, as has been observed in SARS-CoV-1
([*https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2683413/pdf/nihms109289.pdf*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2683413/pdf/nihms109289.pdf))
and has also been suggested in SARS-CoV-2, a more stringent
characterization of these patients would add further impact to the
observations made here. Moreover, inclusion of COVID-19 patients across
all clinical stages and after convalescence as well as longitudinal
sampling over several months and longer are needed to further assess
serological testing sensitivity and specificity of RBD-binding Abs and
whether the latter may be used as a correlate for potentially protective
nAb titers. Additionally, detection of other binding Abs against N, M,
S1, S2 may add valuable information, in particular with respect to
individuals who seemingly fail to develop humoral anti-SARS-CoV-2 RBD
responses. Likewise, evaluation of and comparison to other highly
specific epitopes such as ORF3b and ORF8, as recently suggested by
another preprint
([*https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.30.20085670v1*](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.30.20085670v1)),
might be helpful to rule out seroconversion failure. Notably, the
authors report SARS-CoV-2 RBD binding Ab cross-reactivity against
SARS-CoV-1 in some COVID-19 patients, an observation that mirrors
previous findings about S-binding Abs in several preprints/publications.
Given the rather low number of SARS-CoV-1 convalescent patients in the
general population, this is likely not a major issue. However, for
future clinical application, additional use of potentially even more
specific Abs e.g. against ORFs might be favorable. 

 

***Significance***

In general, this study corroborates previous reports and observations
about enhanced specificity of the SARS-CoV-2 RBD over other binding ab
epitopes (cf.
[*https://www.nature.com/articles/s41591-020-0913-5*](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41591-020-0913-5);
[*https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7189648/pdf/eurosurv-25-16-3.pdf*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7189648/pdf/eurosurv-25-16-3.pdf);
[*https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/26/7/20-0841\_article*](https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/26/7/20-0841_article)).
Most importantly, these data suggest that pre-existing binding Abs
against endemic human coronaviruses seem to be not cross-reactive
against the SARS-CoV-2 RBD and that titers of anti-RBD binding Abs
robustly correlate with nAb levels. These observations are of great
relevance but need further assessment in larger studies of hCoV
seropositive and SARS-CoV-2 negative healthy donors. 

***References***

1\. Chris Ka-fai Li *et al.* T Cell Responses to Whole SARS Coronavirus
in Humans. The Journal of Immunology. 2008, 181 (8) 5490-5500; DOI:
10.4049/jimmunol.181.8.5490

2\. Yap *et al.* Patient-derived mutations impact pathogenicity of
SARS-CoV-2. PrePrint DOI:

[*https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20060160*](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20060160)

3\. Perera *et al* . Serological assays for severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), March 2020. Euro Surveill.
2020;25(16):pii=2000421. https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.
ES.2020.25.16.2000421

4\. Amanat *et al.* A serological assay to detect SARS-CoV-2
seroconversion in humans. *Nat Med* (2020).
[*https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0913-5*](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0913-5)

5\. Okba *et al.* Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2−specific antibody responses in coronavirus disease 2019 patients.
Emerg Infect Dis. 2020 Jul \[*date cited*\].
[*https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2607.200841*](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2607.200841)

*This review was undertaken by Verena van der Heide and Zafar Mahmood as
part of a project by students, postdocs and faculty at the Immunology
Institute of the Icahn School of Medicine, Mount Sinai.*
